Bangladesh Bank the central bank as well as chief authority to regulate the state's monetary and financial system, was established in Dhaka as a body corporate vide the Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 (P.O No. 127 of 1972) with effect from 16th December, 1971. Bangladesh Bank started functioning with all capital and liabilities of Dhaka branch of State Bank of Pakistan.

The paid up capital of Bangladesh Bank is Tk. 30 million divided into 300,000 shares of Tk. 100 each that are fully paid up by the government. A board of directors comprising the Governor as the Chairman, one deputy governor and seven other members oversees the affairs of the bank. The Governor and the deputy governors of the Bank are appointed by the government for a period not exceeding five years and are eligible for reappointment. The Governors who have served since its inception are: ANM Hamidullah (1972-74); AKN Ahmed (1974-76); M Nurul Islam (1976-87); Shegufta Bakht Chaudhuri (1987-92); Khorshed Alam (1992-96); Lutfar Rahman Sarkar (1996-98); Dr. Mohammed Farashuddin (1998-2001); Dr. Fakhruddin Ahmed (2001-2005); Dr. Salehuddin Ahmed (2005-2009); and Dr. Atiur Rahman (2009-till date).

The head office of Bangladesh Bank is motijheel. Besides this Bangladesh Bank have 8 branch offices, one in Dhaka city (sadarghat), and one each in Chittagong, Khulna, Rajshahi, Syhlet, Bogra, Rangpur and Barisal. There are 31 departments in the head office. The head office discharges its duties with 31 departments.

Bangladesh Bank, as a central bank, reserve bank, or monetary authority, is the banking institution granted the exclusive privilege to lend the government its currency. Like a normal commercial bank, Bangladesh Bank charges interest on the loans made to borrowers, primarily the government, and to other commercial banks, typically as a 'lender of last resort'. However, a central bank is distinguished from a normal commercial bank because it has the monopoly on creating the currency, which is loaned to the government in the form of legal tender. It is a bank that can lend money to other banks in times of need. Its primary function is to provide the nation's money supply, but more active duties include controlling subsidized-loan interest rates, and acting as a lender of last resort to the banking sector during times of financial crisis (private banks often being integral to the national financial system). Bangladesh Bank, as a central bank, also has supervisory powers, to ensure that banks and other financial institutions do not behave recklessly or fraudulently.

Vision and mission  The vision of the Bangladesh Bank (BB) aspires, through ensuring the quality of services and the competence of its staff, shall operate as a modern, dynamic, effective, and forward-looking central bank to manage the country’s monetary and financial system with a view to establishing the internal and external value of Bangladesh Taka conductive to rapid growth and development of the economy. To uphold the vision, BB’s mission is to manage the monetary and credit system of Bangladesh with a view to establishing domestic monetary value and maintaining a competitive external per value of the Bangladesh Taka towards fostering growth and development of country’s productive resources in the best national interest. In order to achieve these objectives BB mainly (i) Conduct monetary policy and (ii) Regulates banks and NBFIs (Non-banking Financial Institution) to develop a sound financial system